=head1 NAME 

Games::RubiksCube - A Perl Representation of the Rubik's Cube Puzzle

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use Games::RubiksCube;

    $cube = Games::RubiksCube->new(%args);

=head1 STATUS

Work in progress.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<Games::RubiksCube> is a Perl library that can represent any legal (and
illegal) state of a family of 3D puzzles known under the name of Rubik's Cube.

The module supports arbitrary sizes of the puzzle, and also different widths
in all three dimensions.  The default cube is a 3x3x3 cube but you can also
experiment with a 2x3x4 cube.  Depending on the cube layout, some layers
can only be rotated by 180 degrees.

The cube design that the documentation is based on is as follows:

                        y
     z                /
     |     +---+---+---+
     |    / Y / Y / Y /|
     |   +---+---+---+R|
     |  / Y / Y / Y /| +
     | +---+---+---+R|/|
     |/ Y / Y / Y /| +R|
     +---+---+---+R|/| +
     | B | B | B | +R|/|
     |   |   |   |/| +R|
     +---+---+---+R|/| +
     | B | B | B | +R|/
     |   |   |   |/| +
     +---+---+---+R|/
     | B | B | B | +
     |   |   |   |/
     +---+---+---+.......x

B stands for blue, R for red, and Y for yellow.  The opposite side of blue
is green (G), the opposite side of yellow is white (W), and the opposite side
of red is orange (O).

The axes are in the conventional orientation:

   z|
    |  y
    | /
    |/
    +---------x

Less challenging for ASCII art is this representation, where the cube is
unfolded:

          G G G
          G G G
          G G G
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
          B B B
          B B B
          B B B

=head2 Outer Planes (Faces) and Moves Notation

The 6 faces are identified with capital letters.  Rotating a plane in
clock-wise direction is notated with the letter of the plane (for example
L); rotating it in anti-clock-wise direction is notated with the plane letter
follows by a single quote or apostrophe (for example L', pronounced L prime).
Rotating it twice is denoted by the plane letter followed by a 2 for example
L2.  There is no L3 because it has the same effect as L'.

The "arrows" in the following diagrams show the rotation in clock-wise
direction.  It is easier to grasp, if you remember that you close a bottle
by turning the lid in clock-wise direction.

=head3 Left (L)

      /L....
     /L...::
    |L . .::
    |L . .:
    vL . .

=head3 Right (R)

       ...^R
      .../RR
     . .|RRR
     . .|RR
     . .|R

=head3 Up (U)

       U.U.U
      U U U:
    <U-U-U+:
     . . .|
     . . .

=head3 Down (D)

       .....
      ....::
     . . .:D ^
     . . .D /
     D D D /
     -----+

=head3 Front (F)

       .....
      ----+:
     F F F|:
     F F F|
     F F Fv

=head3 Back (B)
        <---+
       B.B.B|
      .....B|
     . . .:B
     . . .:
     . . .

=head2 Slices

The three slices are:

=head3 Middle Layer (M) (between L and R)

       ./M..
      ./M.::
     .|M .::
     .|M .:
     .vM .

Direction-wise, it follows the left layer.

=head3 Standing Layer (S) (between F and B)

       .....
      S-S-S+
     . . .S|
     . . .Sv
     . . .

Direction-wise it follows the front layer.

=head3 Equatorial Layer (M) (between U and D)

       .....
      ....:E^
     . . .E/
     E-E-E+
     . . .

Direction-wise it follows the front layer.

=head2 Faces and Slices

Rotating a face together with its adjacent slice is denoted by the code of the
face as lowercase:

=over 4

=item B<l> for left (L) and middle layer (M)

=item B<r> for right (R) and middle layer (M)

=item B<f> for front (F) and standing layer (S)

=item B<b> for back (B) and standing layer (S)

=item B<u> for up (U) and equatorial layer (E)

=item B<d> for down (D) and equatorial layer (E)

=back

=head2 Cube Turns

Cube Turns are denoted by the letters x, y, and z (both cases are used).  The
direction is always the opposite of the corresponding slice turn.

=head3 X (R, M, and L)

The direction is the same as R.

=head3 Y (U, E, and D)

The direction is the same as U.

=head3 Z (F, S, and B)

The direction is the same as F.

=head1 CONSTRUCTORS

=over 4

=item B<new ARGS>

This constructor accepts the following dnamed arguments:

=over 4

=item B<xwidth>

The number of cubelets on the x-axis, defaults to 3.

=item B<ywidth>

The number of cubelets on the y-axis, defaults to 3.

=item B<zwidth>

The number of cubelets on the z-axis, defaults to 3.

=item B<colors>

A reference to an array of 6 characters that denote the colors of the
cube, defaults to C<['G', 'O', 'W', 'R', 'Y', 'B']> for the default cube design
(green, orange, white, red, yellow, blue):


          G G G
          G G G
          G G G
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
    O O O W W W R R R Y Y Y
          B B B
          B B B
          B B B

This represents a standard cube where front face F is blue, and the upside
face U is yellow.  The blue face is folded towards you, the green one away
from you, the orange one to the left, and the yellow and red faces are peeled
of to the right.

=back

=back

=head2 Internal Notation

The above notations for the faces and layers (F, B, R, L, U, and D) are in
fact aliases that are only valid for cubes where the layer in question is
between one and three cubelets wide.

Their lowercase versions (f, b, r, l, u, and d) are only valid for cubes where
the layer in question is three or two cubelets wide.

The slice moves (M, E, and S) are only defined for cubes where the layer in
question is one or three cubelets wide.

=head3 Faces, Slices, and Turns

The internal notation, that is always valid, identifies
the plane by the coordinate that is constant.  For example, the plane
3z is the plane where all cubelets have the z-coordinate 3:

           /y
     ^   @ @ @ 
    z| @ @ @:
    3|@ @ @::
    2|.....:
    1|.....
     +---------x
      1 2 3

Turns must always be around the corresponding axis in clock-wise direction and
are identified by the name of the layer followed by the number of 90 degrees
turns to make (between 1 and 3).  The conventional turn C<F> translates to C<1y1>
in internal notation.  And C<3x3> is C<R'> in conventional notation.

For turning multiple layers, the width of the layers has to be inserted right
after the axis.  For example, the move C<3x21> is C<r> in conventional
notation. The C<3x> denotes the layer where all cubelets have the x-coordinate
3, the following 2 means that two layers are turned at once, and the final 1
denotes that the layers are turned once in clock-wise direction.

=head3 Cube Rotations

Cube turns are denoted by the axis around which the cube is turned, preceded
by a 0, for example 0z1.  The leading 0 is mandatory, so that it can be
distinguished from the conventional cube turns for 3x3x3 cubes that use
different axes orientations.

=head3 Cube State

The internal representation of the cube is a list, each item representing a
sticker.

Example: We take a cube with 4 cubelets in x-direction, 3 in y-direction, and
2 in z-direction.  Unfolded it would look like this (with standard colors)

        G G G G
        G G G G
    O O W W W W R R Y Y Y Y
    O O W W W W R R Y Y Y Y
    O O W W W W R R Y Y Y Y
        B B B B
        B B B B

The array indices of the stickers would be:

        0 1 2 3
        4 5 6 7
    8 9 A B C D E F G H I J
    K L M N O P Q R S T U V
    W X Y Z a b c d e f g h
        i j k l
        m n o p

The clever ones will have guessed already that A-F stands for 10-35, and a-p for
36-52.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2022 Guido Flohr <guido.flohr@cantanea.com>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

perl(1)
